2534: The optimum radiation therapy for uveal melanoma is uncertain. Both helium ion irradiation and 125I brachytherapy have been used to treat this neoplasm. This investigation analyzed the control and complication rates of uveal melanomas treated with helium ions of 125I plaques. In both a retrospective and a prospective dynamically balanced study, the control rates appeared to be similar. There were more posterior segment complications after 125I plaques and more anterior segment complications, including neovascular glaucoma, after helium ion irradiation. The follow-up period is too short to draw definitive conclusions on the radiation complications. Overall, approximately 89% of eyes were retained and less than 4% of treated eyes were removed because of failure to control the tumor

3648: Fractionated precision high-dose proton radiotherapy has been carried out at the Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory (HCL) since 1973, in a collaborative effort with the Radiation Medicine Department of Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) and the Retina Service of the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary (MEEI). This paper will discuss proton treatment in general, treatment planning procedures, and results to date in major patient categories. 846 patients have been treated with fractionated proton therapy at the Harvard Cyclotron, with normal tissue and tumor responses consistent with an RBE of 1.1 for the proton beam. Proton beam therapy is the treatment of choice for patients with uveal melanomas, and chordomas and chondrosarcomas involving the skull base and cervical spine. Improved dose distribution possible with protons have allowed greater doses than are given conventionally to be delivered to patients with prostatic carcinoma, head and neck malignancies, ano-rectal cancers, and retroperitoneal tumors. Doses employed have been usually 10 to 20% greater than normally would be delivered in our department to such tumors. Generally, local control rates have been good

2630: The energy spectrum of the HB11 beam at HFR, Petten, has previously been measured by proton and alpha recoil in hydrogen and helium gas proportional counters at power levels of a few kW. There is some doubt whether the spectrum remains the same at the much higher power of 45 MW required for therapeutic fluxes. In order to test this point, a scintillation detector has been developed at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Villingen, Switzerland. While the device is again based on the proton recoil reaction, a combination of mm-sized plastic scintillators and fast electronics will allow it to operate at both a few kW and 45 MW, permitting direct comparison of energy spectra at these very different power levels. Results of preliminary tests at LFR, Petten, are presented


3244: Radiation therapy has shown definite technical improvement due to application of proton beam irradiation. Clinical results of proton beam therapy also suggested enlargement of indication ranges in radial treatment and decrease of post radiation damages of the treatment of cancers in deep-seated organs. Improvement of result in cancer therapy could be expected by this treatment technique in the future

1842: OBJECTIVE: Although radiation therapy is used in early-stage inoperable lung cancer, it often results in injury to functional lung tissue. A study was undertaken to determine the frequency and severity of pulmonary injury revealed by CT in patients who had undergone conformal proton (to a limited volume) radiation therapy. We compared these findings with those from a group of patients who had undergone a combination of photon and conformal proton (to a larger volume) radiation therapy. CONCLUSION: Proton radiation therapy was associated with a lower frequency of pulmonary injury than the combined regimen. Injury correlated well with the volume of normal lung that was irradiated. Conformal proton radiation therapy appears to be able to reduce the incidence and severity of pulmonary injury revealed by CT
